@document.meta
title: plugin-planning
description: broad overview over skogai-plugins
authors: skogix
categories: plugin skogai skogix ai
created: 2026-05-03T13:05:42+0100
updated: 2026-05-03T13:06:27+0100
version: 1.1.1
@end

# plugin overview

skogai-marketplace
  indexes plugins
  describes capabilities
  maps compatibility
  exposes install/discovery metadata
  does not own plugin internals

skogai-core
  loads enabled plugins
  resolves routing/context
  builds prompt/context bundles
  dispatches actions
  observes triggers
  applies hooks
  records events/diffs

skogai-plugin-*
  owns one capability domain
  provides files/prompts/contracts/actions/hooks

# plugin shape
  identity
  description
  capabilities
  provided context
  provided actions
  provided triggers
  provided hooks
  routing hints
  expected inputs
  expected outputs
  compatibility
  safety constraints
  lifecycle notes

# plugins answer
  what are you?
  what do you provide?
  when should you be loaded?
  who should read you?
  what actions do you expose?
  what events do you listen to?
  what hooks do you participate in?
  what input do you expect?
  what output do you produce?
  what should never happen silently?

# plugins roadmap
skogai
  core host
  project runtime
  context builder
  plugin loader
  agent/session glue

skogai-marketplace
  plugin registry
  discovery metadata
  categories/tags
  compatibility matrix
  install mapping
  deprecation notices

skogai-plugin-files
  file interaction skill
  file-context routing
  read/write/patch/move/delete conceptual contracts
  file safety rules

skogai-plugin-git
  diff/status/commit/branch/PR concepts
  git event hooks
  commit policy/context

skogai-plugin-agents
  agent persona/context routing
  role definitions
  delegation maps

skogai-plugin-docs
  README/CLAUDE/AGENT/SKOGAI context conventions
  documentation lifecycle
  doc freshness/routing rules

skogai-plugin-projects
  todo/project/task planning
  project state maps
  issue-like lifecycle

skogai-plugin-shell
  shell command intent
  command safety
  terminal/session routing

# plugin routers
README.md
  human-facing entrypoint
  what this repo is
  how to navigate it
  not agent-specific

SKOGAI.md
  SkogAI-facing entrypoint
  project identity
  plugin/core rules
  routing map
  context loading strategy

AGENT.md
  generic agent instructions
  role expectations
  safe defaults
  what agents may/may not do

CLAUDE.md
  Claude-specific operational guidance
  only for Claude quirks/preferences
  should defer to SKOGAI.md for canonical project rules

CONTEXT.md
  map of context files
  what to read for what task
  freshness rules

ACTIONS.md
  available action concepts
  expected input/output types
  safety levels

TRIGGERS.md
  observable event types
  what they mean
  which plugin owns them

HOOKS.md
  lifecycle hook map
  ordering expectations
  allowed side effects

ROUTES.md
  task/category → context/action/plugin routing

MARKETPLACE.md
  marketplace-specific plugin index expectations
  plugin metadata standards
  compatibility/deprecation rules

# plugins internal routing
README.md
  human overview

SKOGAI.md
  plugin identity and routing root

AGENT.md
  generic agent behavior inside this plugin

PLUGIN.md
  what this plugin provides

ACTIONS.md
  action contracts

TRIGGERS.md
  trigger contracts

HOOKS.md
  hook contracts

CONTEXT.md
  what context fragments exist and when to load them

SAFETY.md
  forbidden/sensitive behavior

CHANGELOG.md
  human-readable evolution

# Router File Responsibilities
README.md

Human first. It should answer:

What is this?
Why does it exist?
Where do I start?
What is stable?
What is experimental?

Expected input:

human reader
repo browser
new contributor

Expected output:

orientation
links to deeper files
no operational authority unless explicitly stated
SKOGAI.md

Canonical AI-facing root. This should be the “read me first” file for SkogAI-aware agents.

It should answer:

What kind of repo is this?
What owns what?
Which files are authoritative?
Which plugin/context/action maps exist?
How should context be built?
What should be ignored unless requested?

Expected input:

agent/session startup
context builder
task router
plugin loader

Expected output:

routing decisions
context inclusion hints
authority hierarchy
plugin identity

Authority level: high.

AGENT.md

Generic agent behavior. This should not be specific to Claude, Goose, Dot, or any one model.

It should answer:

How should an agent behave in this repo?
What should it avoid?
What counts as a safe default?
What must be surfaced as uncertainty?
What is the preferred output shape?

Expected input:

any agent entering the repo
task execution context
review/planning context

Expected output:

behavior constraints
task etiquette
safe operation defaults

Authority level: medium-high.

CLAUDE.md

Model/client-specific. This should be allowed to contain quirks, but not project law.

It should answer:

What does Claude need to know specifically?
What local habits or tool quirks apply?
What should Claude defer to?

Expected input:

Claude Code
Claude-like agent runner

Expected output:

Claude-specific guidance
references to SKOGAI.md / AGENT.md

Authority level: client-specific, below SKOGAI.md.

CONTEXT.md

Context index. This is the map room.

It should answer:

What context fragments exist?
When should each be loaded?
What is expensive?
What is stale?
What is task-specific?
What should never be loaded by default?

Expected input:

task description
repo state
agent role
plugin metadata

Expected output:

context bundle plan
included files
excluded files
reason for inclusion/exclusion
ROUTES.md

Task router. This is where intent becomes navigation.

It should map:

task type → context files
task type → plugin
task type → actions
task type → hooks
task type → expected output

Example concepts, not implementation:

"modify file"
  plugin: files
  context: file skill, safety, patch contract
  action class: file mutation
  output: diff summary

"review repo"
  plugin: docs / git / files
  context: README, SKOGAI, recent diffs
  action class: inspect only
  output: findings

"create plugin"
  plugin: marketplace / docs
  context: plugin manifest expectations
  action class: scaffold / document
  output: plugin map
ACTIONS.md

Action catalog. It should describe what actions exist without binding them to a shell script, Python module, API, MCP tool, or cursed duct-tape daemon.

Each action should define:

action id
purpose
owner plugin
safety level
expected input type
expected output type
side-effect class
requires confirmation?
records diff/event?

Action side-effect classes:

inspect
  reads state only

propose
  produces a plan/diff but changes nothing

mutate
  changes files/state

external
  talks to external services

dangerous
  deletes, overwrites, publishes, grants access, spends money, leaks secrets, etc.
TRIGGERS.md

Triggers are observed events.

They should not describe what to do in detail. They describe what happened.

Trigger examples:

file.changed
file.created
file.deleted
git.diff.changed
git.commit.created
plugin.enabled
plugin.disabled
context.requested
agent.session.started
agent.session.ended
task.created
task.completed
tool.failed
safety.warning

Each trigger should define:

trigger id
source
payload type
frequency expectation
owned by plugin/core
may invoke hooks?
default severity
HOOKS.md

Hooks are lifecycle attachment points.

They answer:

When may plugins participate?
In what order?
What can they read?
What can they change?
What must they return?

Core hook categories:

before_context_build
after_context_build
before_action
after_action
before_file_mutation
after_file_mutation
before_commit
after_commit
on_plugin_load
on_plugin_enable
on_plugin_disable
on_error
on_task_start
on_task_end

Hook output should usually be one of:

allow
deny
modify_context
add_warning
request_confirmation
emit_event
suggest_action
Actions, Triggers, Hooks: Clean Difference

This distinction should stay sacred:

Action
  An intentional operation.

Trigger
  An observed event.

Hook
  A place where behavior can attach to lifecycle.

Example:

User asks to edit a file.
  action: file.patch

File changes.
  trigger: file.changed

Before patch is applied.
  hook: before_file_mutation

After patch is applied.
  hook: after_file_mutation

That triangle keeps the system from turning into soup with a YAML hat.

Core Action Map

Generic action families:

context actions
  build context
  inspect context
  explain routing
  summarize available context

plugin actions
  list plugins
  inspect plugin
  enable plugin
  disable plugin
  validate plugin
  resolve plugin capability

file actions
  inspect file
  inspect tree
  read file
  propose file change
  apply file change
  move file
  delete file

git actions
  inspect status
  inspect diff
  create commit
  inspect history
  propose branch/PR notes

agent actions
  assign task
  route task
  request review
  compare agent outputs
  record agent decision

marketplace actions
  search plugins
  inspect plugin metadata
  check compatibility
  install plugin
  mark deprecated

No implementation needs to exist yet. This is ontology first, machinery later.

Generic File Plugin Map

For skogai-plugin-files, the conceptual shape:

skogai-plugin-files
  provides:
    skill: working with files
    action contracts:
      file.inspect
      file.read
      file.propose_change
      file.apply_change
      file.move
      file.delete
    triggers:
      file.created
      file.changed
      file.deleted
      file.moved
    hooks:
      before_file_mutation
      after_file_mutation
      before_context_build
      after_context_build
    context:
      file safety rules
      patch preference
      path explicitness
      diff-first behavior

Expected action input/output types:

file.inspect
  input:
    path or path set
    inspection depth
    purpose
  output:
    file metadata
    relevant excerpts
    uncertainty notes

file.read
  input:
    path
    reason for reading
  output:
    content or selected ranges
    encoding/status notes

file.propose_change
  input:
    target path
    requested change
    relevant context
  output:
    proposed diff
    explanation of intent
    risk notes

file.apply_change
  input:
    target path
    approved/proposed change
    mutation mode
  output:
    changed files
    diff summary
    validation notes

file.move
  input:
    source path
    destination path
    reason
  output:
    old path
    new path
    affected references if known

file.delete
  input:
    path
    reason
    safety context
  output:
    deleted path
    risk notes
    recovery hint if available
Marketplace Map

The marketplace should be mostly metadata.

Conceptually:

skogai-marketplace
  README.md
  SKOGAI.md
  MARKETPLACE.md
  CONTEXT.md
  ROUTES.md
  categories/
  plugins/
  compatibility/
  deprecated/

Plugin records should contain:

plugin id
name
summary
repository
owner
status
version
category
capabilities
dependencies
compatibility
safety level
install target
context files provided
actions provided
triggers provided
hooks provided

Plugin status values:

experimental
active
stable
deprecated
archived
broken
unknown

Plugin categories:

core
files
git
docs
agents
context
memory
rag
shell
project
marketplace
security
deployment
ui

Marketplace should not decide how a plugin works. It should decide:

Can this be found?
Can this be installed?
Is this compatible?
Is this deprecated?
What does it claim to provide?
Where is the source of truth?
Authority Hierarchy

When context files disagree, use this order:

user request
explicit task instructions
repo-local SKOGAI.md
repo-local AGENT.md
plugin-local SKOGAI.md / PLUGIN.md
plugin-local ACTIONS.md / HOOKS.md / TRIGGERS.md
README.md
general docs
old summaries
guesses

Claude-specific or client-specific files should never override canonical project files unless the issue is client behavior.

SKOGAI.md > AGENT.md > CLAUDE.md
Routing Overview

Task comes in:

input task
  identify task type
  identify repo type
  read root router file
  resolve relevant plugins
  resolve context files
  resolve allowed actions
  check hooks
  produce plan/output
  optionally perform action
  emit event/diff summary

Conceptual route classes:

read-only route
  inspect, summarize, explain

proposal route
  inspect, propose diff/change, no mutation

mutation route
  inspect, apply approved/intended change, report diff

maintenance route
  refactor, move, split, deprecate, archive

marketplace route
  index, categorize, validate plugin metadata

agent route
  delegate, compare, review, vote
Context Loading Strategy

Default context should be minimal:

always:
  README.md
  SKOGAI.md if present

when agent behavior matters:
  AGENT.md

when Claude/client behavior matters:
  CLAUDE.md

when plugin work:
  PLUGIN.md
  ACTIONS.md
  HOOKS.md
  TRIGGERS.md
  CONTEXT.md

when file mutation:
  file plugin skill
  safety rules
  target files
  recent diff

when marketplace work:
  MARKETPLACE.md
  plugin records
  compatibility notes

Avoid loading:

all plugin docs
all historical notes
all examples
all generated files
old context snapshots
large logs
irrelevant agent personas
Event / Diff Philosophy

Every meaningful operation should be narratable as:

event in
decision made
diff or no-diff out

If there is no diff, output should still explain the no-diff result:

no change because already satisfied
no change because unsafe
no change because missing context
no change because task was inspect-only

This maps well to your existing “diff as official language” model without forcing every thought into git.

Suggested First Stable Documents

For skogai-marketplace:

README.md
SKOGAI.md
MARKETPLACE.md
PLUGIN-RECORD.md
ROUTES.md
CONTEXT.md
ACTIONS.md
TRIGGERS.md
HOOKS.md

For skogai-plugin-files:

README.md
SKOGAI.md
PLUGIN.md
SKILL.md
ACTIONS.md
TRIGGERS.md
HOOKS.md
SAFETY.md
CONTEXT.md

For root skogai:

README.md
SKOGAI.md
AGENT.md
CONTEXT.md
ROUTES.md
PLUGINS.md
ACTIONS.md
TRIGGERS.md
HOOKS.md
Clean Initial Scope

I would avoid building “the system” at first. Define only the maps.

First pass:

1. Root context file conventions
2. Plugin identity model
3. Marketplace plugin record model
4. Action/trigger/hook vocabulary
5. File plugin as first example plugin

Second pass:

1. Add compatibility/deprecation model
2. Add plugin categories
3. Add context routing rules
4. Add safety levels
5. Add agent/client-specific router files

Third pass:

1. Loader implementation
2. Validation
3. CLI commands
4. Marketplace indexing
5. Plugin install/update flow

Current best target shape:

skogai
  owns runtime and routing

skogai-marketplace
  owns discovery and metadata

skogai-plugin-files
  owns the first extracted skill/capability

every repo
  owns a SKOGAI.md router file

every plugin
  owns PLUGIN.md, ACTIONS.md, TRIGGERS.md, HOOKS.md, CONTEXT.md

every action
  has typed input/output expectations

every trigger
  describes an observed event

every hook
  describes a lifecycle attachment point
